# 前折

## Exercise 1

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fb-102.jpg){width="127" height="205"}
![](/images/fb-103.jpg){width="286" height="205"}

</div>

Have your feet apart, wrists on something, for example back of chair or
barre, straight arms, and flat or slightly backward bent back. Force
shoulders and chest down to ground with little bouncing movements. If
necessary change to a lower object to hold on  and move your feet to the
front so that they are closer to the object to increase the stretch. 

![](/images/fb-105.jpg){width="195" height="180"}

When you are close enough grab your ancles with one hand and then the
second. Do 20 repeats. 

![](/images/pointefb01.jpg){width="207" height="182"}

If you have advanced to do the pointe exercises **always** do this
exercise and other frontbend exercises where possible en pointe.

![](/images/fb-ass-100.jpg){width="154" height="219"}

Assisted: Have the assistant to push you firmly down as shown above. 

## Exercise 2

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image200.jpg){width="142" height="215"}
![](/images/Image201.jpg){width="161" height="215"}
![](/images/fb1.jpg){width="208" height="215"}

</div>

Have your feet comfortably apart and bend forward. Grasp the legs with
the hands near the ankles and pull in with a 1-2-3-4-5 action as close
as you can get, but only just as close as you can. Relax for a 1-2-3-4-5
count. Repeat the exercise 15 times.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fb-ass-01.JPG){width="201" height="191"}
![](/images/backmass02.jpg){width="234" height="191"}

</div>

This exercise can be assisted: Sit on the floor as above, grasp the legs
near the ankles and have the assistant push you forward into the
position (this can be variated in many ways as can seen above). When
done the assistant should massage the back in the position back and
forth since this releaves and stretches the vertebrae.

![](/images/Image504.jpg){width="234" height="189"}

If you feel that the frontbend is difficult try the position above in
the beginning. 15 repeats for each leg.

### Variation 1

![](/images/Image454.jpg){width="217" height="107"}

Lie on your back. Bring both legs up and use the hands to help push the
legs flat to the floor. To a 1-2-3-4-5 count push the legs away from the
body to a nearer splits position. Your back should be flat on the floor.

![](/images/fb-over-ass-100.jpg){width="280" height="148"}

Assisted: Sit as shown above and let the assitant push your legs firmly
backwards as far back as possible and hold for 30 seconds when reached
as far back as possible. Do 15 repeats <span class="underline">never going out of the frontbend.</span>

![](/images/fb-over-ass-102.jpg){width="292" height="152"}

If you want to increase the frontbend even more you continue to the
assisted stretch shown above.

### Variation 2

![](/images/Image202.jpg){width="137" height="184"}

Have your feet comfortably apart and bend forward until the face is at
the shins. Have the fingers lightly clasped behind the back and bring
the hands with a 1-2-3-4-5 action to the position above. Relax for a 5
count. Repeat 10 times. Try to get the hands to the floor.

![](/images/fb-ass-101.JPG){width="261" height="167"}

Assisted: Let the assistant pull the arms down to increase the stretch
and hold the position there.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image203.jpg){width="120" height="202"}
![](/images/fb-106.jpg){width="187" height="202"}

</div>

Now grasp the ankles and to the 1-2-3-4-5 pull in even stronger to get
the head between the legs. Relax for a 5 count. Repeat 10 times.

Assisted: The assistant helps you to by pushing you closer.

![](/images/Image204.jpg){width="130" height="165"}

Now reach through the legs and to the 1-2-3-4-5 push the hands as far
back from the heels as you are able. Relax for a 5 count. Repeat 10
times.

Assisted: The assistant can put one hand on the back of your thighs and
pull your hands as far back from the heels as possible. When done the
assistant should massage the back in the position back and forth as in
the first variation of the exercise.

## Exercise 3

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image205.jpg){width="210" height="120"}
![](/images/Image206.jpg){width="336" height="110"}

</div>

Sit down and reach forward and move legs to a straddle position. Sitting
with feet a little apart reach along the legs to a 1-2-3 and get the
head down towards the legs as you are able to. Use the arms to push the
feet as wide apart as possible to a 1-2-3-4-5 count while keeping the
head down. The head will come down as you spread the legs.
![](/images/Image207.jpg){width="243" height="132"}

Then put the hands to the front and push yourself erect. Bring the legs
together. Do 10 repeats of the exercise. A little improvement with each
exercise will get you there and you may be some way from the positions
in the beginning.

## Exercise 4

![](/images/Image211.jpg){width="265" height="114"}

This exercise is called a front flex. Lie on the floor on your back.
Bring one leg up and using the arm press it down so that it is in a
splits position.

Assisted: The assistant can press the leg down to the splits position
and beyond.
![](/images/Image212.jpg){width="227" height="151"}

Bring the other leg up to the same position and capture it with the
other arm. Raise the head assisting the movement by use of the arms.
Your arms are above the knee so the legs should not be bent. Use a
1-2-3-4-5 action and try to get the head further away from the floor
towards your seat. Relax for a five count and repeat 10 times with each
leg. It's possible to fold the back forward the same way as in a
backbend meaning that your face will reach your crotch in time. Locking
your arms around your seat in the position and pulling in does it.

Assisted: The assistant can pull you up and towards your seat.

## Exercise 5

![](/images/Image208.jpg){width="132" height="185"}

Stand with your feet apart and bend forward with hands rearwards through
your legs. Reach back to a 1-2-3-4-5 push trying to get as far back as
you can. Relax for a 5 count then repeat 15 times.

Assisted: The assistant can put one hand on the back of your thighs and
pull your hands through your legs as far as possible.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image209.jpg){width="136" height="185"}
![](/images/Image210.jpg){width="228" height="185"}

</div>

Reach up and grasp the thighs and pull into the bend as tight as you
can. Relax for a 5 count then repeat 15 times. On the final repeat try
to get the shoulders through the thighs to grasp the legs and tighten to
a 1-2-3-4-5.

After this exercise doing splits exercise 1 is advised.

![](/images/fb2.jpg){width="169" height="225"}

If you can't reach thru the legs as above try to use any furniture as
shown above to pull yourself in.

Assisted: Have the assistant push you thru your legs and upwards.

![](/images/fb3.jpg){width="265" height="184"}

Assisted 2: Sit on a chair. Bend into a frontbend as much as you can.
Let the assistant pull your legs backwards as much as possible and keep
them there for at least a 1-2-3-4-5 count and then pull them further
repeating until it's not possible to go further. This sequence should
be repeated 20 times. For newbeginners this assisted stretch can be
painfull the first week. Don't give up! The legs can be pulled down to
the floor from the position on a chair shown above.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fb-over-ass-01.jpg){width="205" height="174"}
![](/images/fb-over-ass-02.jpg){width="173" height="173"}
![](/images/fb-over-ass-03.jpg){width="160" height="174"}
![](/images/fb-over-ass-04.jpg){width="173" height="174"}

</div>

Assisted 3: A very good variation of the assisted stretches for
frontbends to do after "assisted 2" above is to have your assistant to
sit on your lower back (or at least push it downwards in one of the ways
shown above) and pull your legs firmly backwards as much as possible and
hold them as far back as possible for at least a 1-2-3-4-5 count and
them pull them further repeating until it's not possible to go further.
Repeat this sequence 20 times. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fb-over-ass-05.jpg){width="218" height="157"}
![](/images/fb-over-ass-06.jpg){width="225" height="157"}

</div>

Other assisted variations worth doing are the shown above.

![](/images/fb-over-01.jpg){width="202" height="176"}

As you see in the picture above your frontbends will improve very much.

## Exercise 6

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fb-over-101.jpg){width="207" height="161"}
![](/images/fb-over-100.jpg){width="194" height="161"}
![](/images/Image213.jpg){width="292" height="162"}

</div>

Get 3 chairs (as you can see you can always use other furniture too).
Sit on one of the chairs and put the feet up on the other two other
chairs. Have your legs comfortably wide apart (because you're going to
get well between them) and lean forward as far as you can with the help
of your natural weight and to 1-2-3-4-5 tighten the bend. When or if you
can grasp the rear legs of the chair this will allow you to pull in
strongly. Relax for a 5 count. The chairs should be quite stable. Use
the count of 1-2-3-4-5 to get a bit further between the legs each time
and then rest for the 5 count and then repeat. Do a reasonable number of
repeats if you can as the hip joint can take a lot more than you think!
Repeat this exercise at least 15 times.

Assisted: Have the assistant to pull you in more between the legs.

## Exercise 7

In this exercise you will try to tighten your frontbend and stretch your
spine as much as it's possible to a frontfold! This will improve both
the backbends and frontbends and you will be amazed over how much the
spine can be stretched. In the beginning the exercise probably will feel
a bit uncomfortable, but the discomfort disappears very soon and you
will find it to be one of those you enjoy most. Always do this exercise
after doing frontbends exercise 4.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/extrfb1.jpg){width="200" height="150"}
![](/images/extrfb3.jpg){width="200" height="150"}

</div>

On the floor as shown above with your feet parallell with your
shoulders, the hands and elbows on the floor and the knees bent. Try to
get your chest down towards the floor as much as possible to increase
the stretch counting 1-2-3-4-5. If difficult grasp your feet and pull
downwards as shown above.

Assisted: The assistant can push you downwards til you reach the floor.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/extrfb4.jpg){width="200" height="150"}
![](/images/extrfb5.jpg){width="200" height="150"}

</div>

Straighten the knees and try to get your legs behind your shoulders.
Your upper back and back of the head should rest on the floor. Again
bend the knees into a "sitting down" action increasing the bend. Do
this as much as possible to a count of 1-2-3-4-5. When feeling
comfortable increase the stretch with a count of 1-2-3-4-5 til you
can't go further.

Assisted: The assistant can push you downwards by pushing your thighs
downwards.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/extrfb6.jpg){width="200" height="150"}
![](/images/extrfb7.jpg){width="200" height="150"}

</div>

Now exhale as much as possible, pull in your stomach and grab yourself
by your upper thighs trying to reach your hands and interlock if
possible. Pull in firmly counting 1-2-3-4-5 to get the frontbend even
tighter towards a frontfold. Repeat the exercise as many times as you
need or at least 25 times. In the last repeat hold for as long as
possible. In time your hip will rest hard on your chest and your crotch
on your face in a frontfold. Locking your arms around your back and
thighs will help you pull in and stay in the position.

Assisted: The assistant should firmly push you into the position til the
fold is reached and hold hard in it you for as long as possible. In the
beginning this might feel a bit uncomfortable, but the discomfort
disappears very soon. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/extrfb8.jpg){width="253" height="191"}
![](/images/UltimateP1.JPG){width="170" height="192"}

</div>

After the exercise straighten your knees and stand in the frontbend as
shown above for as long as necessary.


