# 腿在背后

## Exercise 1

![](/images/othlex-102a.jpg){width="188" height="174"}

Preparation. Sit on the floor with straight and put one leg on the thigh
of the other leg. Now bend the knee so that the leg resting on your
thigh slowly is pushed towards your chest to the count of 1-2-3-4-5. If
you want to increase the stretch sit upright with straight back. Now
grab your foot and pull it upwards towards your face. When feeling
comfortable you shouldn't need the assist of the thigh and raise the
leg until it's hard on your chest and face with your hands. Repeat the
exercise 20 times with each leg.

Assisted: Sit on the floor with a straight back towards a wall. Have the
assistant push leg firmly until the whole leg and foot is hard on your
chest and then hold for at least 30 seconds. After the assistand should
slowly and firmly move the foot higher up and hold for 30 seconds. Do at
least 20 repeats with each leg.

![](/images/othlex-102b.jpg){width="167" height="248"}

A very good yoga variation of this is the one shown above. It will also
stretch your shoulders.

## Exercise 2

![](/images/Image224.jpg){width="145" height="169"} 

Sit on the floor and raise one leg as near to the picture above as you
can and you can bend the back forward as needed.

![](/images/Image225.jpg){width="152" height="169"}

To the count of 1-2-3-4-5 move the leg trying to get the leg behind the
shoulder

![](/images/Image226.jpg){width="143" height="169"}

later you will get the leg behind your back. Do the same with the other
leg and repeat the exercise 10 times with each leg.

Assisted: You can have your assistant to help you get the leg behind the
back as above in the exercise.

## Exercise 3

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image227.jpg){width="193" height="171"}
![](/images/Image228.jpg){width="169" height="171"}
![](/images/Image229.jpg){width="211" height="169"}
![](/images/Image230.jpg){width="167" height="195"}

</div>

Like many of my exercises this starts sitting on the floor so that you
have a good steady base. If you have this you do not get tense and feel
afraid you will fall over. This allows better flexibility. Now raise one
leg behind the head. Bend the back forward if needed. Put the other hand
and leg in a comfortable position for balance. To the count of 1-2-3-4-5
push the leg firmly down the back as far as you possibly can towards
towards what is shown above or even lower down the back. It does not
matter if you have a bit of a bent back as this is natural but the hip
socket is very strong so do make sure that the 1-2-3-4-5 pull down
action is quite firm and that you are getting this foot pulled well down
the back. Do the exercise 15 times with each leg. That foot is going to
touch the floor behind your back sooner than you imagine!

Assisted: Have your assistant to firmly and slowly push the leg far down
the back.

![](/images/lbh-06.jpg){width="210" height="100"}

A teaser: One of my students is able to get the foot down lower than her
waist, move around any way she wants and sitting and pulling it down she
can, in time, put it on the floor so that the foot rests on the floor.

![](/images/Image455.jpg){width="158" height="197"}

Here is another example of this...

![](/images/lotusbehindback.jpg){width="188" height="195"}

...and one for the really advanced, a lotus behind the back. It
requires that you master **all** leg exercises and dislocations of the
hip joints.


