# 劈叉

<span class="important">Important notice!</span>  If you have suffered from one or many dislocations in
either hips or shoulders you should learn to do controlled dislocations.
This often is a symptom of hypermobility and you will sooner or later
dislocate again. A medical term for this is Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, but
often this disease is missed by most MD's unless it's mentioned. Around
40% of the population has Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome and often without
knowing it. The symptoms are often pain in joints, hypermobility and
dislocations of the joints (for example if you can learn how to do a
split in a short time, partially dislocate your shoulders - that often
means that you will hear a popping or cracking sound - or if you have
overbent elbows you most likely have Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome). Very often
the symptoms show gradually, often with pain or dislocations, and
increase with time to states that aren't controllable. It's not a
question if it happens, but when. To prevent this it's important to
learn to do controlled dislocations, build up strenght and flexibility
around all joints and practicing yoga and contortion does all this. The
reason is simple. If a symptom like a dislocation occurs and it isn't
controlled your muscles will go into spasm. Being able to do a
controlled dislocation prevents this and it should be done many times on
a daily basis. A controlled dislocation is a dislocation where you are
able to dislocate the joint, move the limb <span class="underline">with the help of another limb or with help from someone that assists you</span> and then
putting it back to it's normal state. All joints that can be dislocated
must be trained in this order of fashion and the controlled dislocation
must become a part of your normal range of movement! It's important to
train all joints that dislocate, because that you once had an
uncontrolled dislocation in i.e. the hips doesn't mean that the next
won't be in the shoulders etc and the dislocations gradually worsens
for each time making it impossible to control them in the end. You
should work the same way with backbends and later  backfolds since the
dislocations tend to spread to other areas than the joints around the
limbs. When working on backbends and especially backfolds put a stick, a
finger or something appropriate to increase the fold and partially
dislocate the vertebrae. The last part is <span class="underline">very</span> important!
Using [the contortion barre](./contortion_barre) is recommended.
Persons that have experienced or experiences symptoms like dislocating,
pain in joint and hypermobility should work towards being able to do all
of the program to perfection, as a prevention, to be able to get the
joints and the muscles around the joints supple to the outer limit and
learn to control them in situations like this by doing controlled
dislocations as much as possible. Also all exercises, if possible,
should be done assisted with firm stretches until the maximum suppleness
is reached at least once each day, preferrably more! This might be
difficult, uncomforable and even painful, but only in the beginning.
It's not as difficult as it sounds and that is something you've probably
found out by now or will.

## Exercise 1

![](/images/Image459.jpg){width="240" height="127"}

Splits prepairing. For this exercise, since you're starting to do the
splits and will need to have a good steady foundation you should take
the weight on the hands and lean forward so the hands are on the floor
about level with the front leg knee. The rear leg should have the foot
turned out so that the side of the foot is taking the weight. (Better
balance!) You should drop down to a comfortable position and then to a
1-2-3-4-5 count, bounce towards sitting on the floor and the hands still
take a lot of the weight. Change legs (other to the front) and do the
1-2-3-4-5 bounce. Repeat the exercise until you have done 15 left leg
front and 15 right leg front.

When you are as low as you can get into your splits, tension your leg
muscles tightly, like you would if you were trying to stand up from the
splits, hold the tension for 30 seconds and then relax the muscles
completely. When you relax you should find that you are sliding down a
bit further. Always do at least 15 repeats each leg of this for each
time you are practicing your splits. Be patient! When you're able to
sit in the splits do that it as often as you can. Practice 2-3 times
every day. When watching TV, do the splits during the commercials. That
makes great 5 minute splits. If you like to continue after the
commercials too. In the end you'll find that you can sit in the splits
as long as you wish. If you like to you can apply this method as far as
you advance since it will help you to stay longer in all split
positions.

## Exercise 2

![](/images/Image231.jpg){width="241" height="103"}

Forward stretch into splits. Bend forward and place the hands around the
ankles.

![](/images/Image232.jpg){width="288" height="92"}

Now push the feet out towards the splits as far as you can then with a
1-2-3-4-5 count push a little bit more trying to get to the position
shown above. Return the legs to the start position. Repeat this 15
times.

## Exercise 3

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image233.jpg){width="202" height="152"}
![](/images/Image234.jpg){width="201" height="151"}

</div>

Splits starters and flexing. Slide down into a straddle.

Assisted: Have the assistant to firmly, but slowly push you down into
the straddle. Repeat 15 times twice daily if you're having difficulties
getting into the straddle. 

![](/images/Image235.jpg){width="291" height="118"}

Sit in the straddle.

![](/images/Image236.jpg){width="249" height="121"}

Slide the hand along the leg and to a 1-2-3-4-5 count try to get the
head down to the leg as above. Sit upright and the do this to the other
leg. This is one cycle of the exercise. Repeat the cycle 15 times.

![](/images/Image494.jpg){width="245" height="139"}

Tip: If you have difficulties with getting into the splits or bending to
the side in the split in the beginnging you can bend your knee on the
opposite side. However try to do the exercise as soon as possible with
straight legs.

Tip: When you are as low as you can get into your splits, tension your
leg muscles tightly, like you would if you were trying to stand up from
the splits, hold the tension for 30 seconds and then relax the muscles
completely. When you relax you should find that you are sliding down a
bit further. Always do at least 15 repeats each leg of this for each
time you are practicing your splits. Be patient! When you're able to
sit in the splits do that it as often as you can. Practice 2-3 times
every day. When watching TV, do the splits during the commercials. That
makes great 5 minute splits. If you like to continue after the
commercials too. In the end you'll find that you can sit in the splits
as long as you wish. Another good way getting into the straddle is to
put ankle weights around the legs and do a straddle up against a wall.
Gravity will naturally pull your legs down slowly and this method is
less painful. It should be done twice daily as long as you feel
difficulties getting into the straddle and it takes some time, 30
minutes are recommended. When your legs has reached the floor you should
always hold the straddle for at least 1-5 minutes or longer. While
you're doing this exercise you can always read this handbook.

## Exercise 4

![](/images/Image237.jpg){width="267" height="166"}

Sit down in a frontsplit with left foot forward and hold for a slow 5
count.

![](/images/Image483.jpg){width="197" height="152"}

Now bend the knee as above till it's completely bent and hold for a
slow 30 count. This will increase the stretch radically.

![](/images/Image238.jpg){width="267" height="121"}

Twist to the front using hand leverage as necessary and sit in a
straddlesplit with heels on the floor and toes up and hold for a slow 5
count. Twist into the frontsplit with the right foot forward and hold
for a slow 5 count then twist back to the straddlesplit and hold for a
slow 5 count. Take a long ten rest count. This is one cycle of the
exercise. Repeat the cycle 15 times.

## Exercise 5

In this exercise you'll be doing a split on the side. In time this
exercise easily can develope you an oversplit. 

![](/images/Image239.jpg){width="153" height="140"}

Splits flexing on the back. On your back slightly to the side for
balance bring one leg up.

![](/images/Image240.jpg){width="326" height="120"}

Use the 1-2-3-4-5 count with a swing action to get the foot towards the
floor and behind your back Repeat this for the other leg. Repeat the
exercise 15 times with each leg.

![](/images/pointesplit.jpg)

You can also do this exercise standing. Try to combine it with the
pointe exercises that you find in the other leg exercises. 

![](/images/splturnedout.jpg){width="216" height="289"}

If you're not standing en pointe when doing standing splits the leg
you're standing on **always must be turned out**!

### Variation 1

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image241.jpg){width="306" height="99"}
![](/images/Image242.jpg){width="274" height="97"}

</div>

Lie on your back slightly to the side for balance. Bring one leg up.
Twist a little to grasp the leg near the ankle with the opposite hand.
Steady yourself with the other arm, twisting your body as needed. Pull
down to a 1-2-3-4-5 count to get the foot as near to the floor as you
can and keep both legs as straight as you can. Repeat this for the other
leg. Repeat the exercise at least 15 times with each leg. Note that the
intent is to get the maximum leg mobility getting the foot to the floor
while keeping the "floor leg" on the floor.

### Variation 2

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image460.jpg){width="336" height="114"}
![](/images/Image484.jpg){width="252" height="118"}

</div>

Assisted: Have the assistant to pull down your leg.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-ass-15.jpg){width="190" height="223"}
![](/images/Image461.jpg){width="225" height="224"}
![](/images/Image462.jpg){width="207" height="224"}

</div>

Assisted standing: Have the assistant to pull your leg as shown above.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-os-13.jpg){width="153" height="232"}
![](/images/Image243.jpg){width="105" height="232"}
![](/images/ss-os-06.jpg){width="201" height="232"}
![](/images/ss-os-09.jpg){width="128" height="232"}

</div>

Here are some pictures of the leg pulled very far across the back.

## Exercise 6

![](/images/Image244.jpg){width="359" height="80"}

Flat on your back and bring one leg up and grasp it. Pull down to a
1-2-3-4-5 count to get the foot as near the floor in splits as you can.
Keep both legs as straight as you can. Repeat this for the other leg.
Repeat the exercise 15 times with each leg.

![](/images/Image486.jpg){width="274" height="128"}

If you feel discomfort in the beginning you can bend your knee as above
for a shorter while..

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/othlex-ass-01.jpg){width="223" height="137"}
![](/images/Image489.jpg){width="244" height="137"}
![](/images/fs-ass-03.jpg){width="309" height="137"}

</div>

Assisted: Have the assistant sit on your leg and pull down the leg to be
stretched. If you feel discomfort in the beginning bend the knee for a
shorter while..When the leg is as close to your face as possible hold in
this position for 30 seconds and release. Do 15 repeats with each leg
increasing the time held with 10 seconds each time. To increase the
stretch the assistant can either sit on your thigh or hold it.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fs-ass-02.jpg){width="128" height="312"}
![](/images/fs-ass-04.jpg){width="135" height="312"}

</div>

If you prefere it you can also stand and have the assistant lift your
leg as shown avoce.

### Variation

![](/images/Image463.jpg){width="364" height="123"}

Legs in the splits and reach along the leg 1-2-3-4-5. Repeat other leg.
Get the chin to the floor and use the arm not holding the leg to remain
in balance. Legs in the splits and face right to the floor.

## Exercise 7

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image245.jpg){width="287" height="86"}
![](/images/Image246.jpg){width="292" height="143"}

</div>

Sit in a comfortable straddle. This may be a bit wide at the start so
legs comfortably apart is where you should be. Place the hands on the
floor for support (as an alternative you can slide them to the front for
a better stretch) and lean forward bringing the head and body down to a
1-2-3-4-5 action as near to the floor as you can. Do this 15 times.

Assisted: Have the assistant to take your hands and pull you to the
front.

## Exercise 8

### Preparation

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image481.jpg){width="265" height="149"}
![](/images/ss-01.jpg){width="269" height="149"}

</div>

Lie on your back with your arms either as shown or more to the side for
better balance. Raise the legs and to a 1-2-3-4-5 bounce action try to
get them to the floor in the perfect cut split position as shown. Note
the toes upwards. If you can get to the floor with the feet, hold the
position for a 1-2-3-4-5 count.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-ass-05.jpg){width="209" height="160"}
![](/images/Image482.jpg){width="258" height="160"}
![](/images/ss-ass-09.jpg){width="181" height="159"}

</div>

Assisted: Have the assistant hold your legs down to the floor in this
position one minute for 15 times. To increase the stretch even more the
assistant can stand on the thighs so that the whole of the legs will be
on the floor. 

## Exercise 9

### Preparation for oversplits 1

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image490.jpg){width="273" height="179"}
![](/images/Image491.jpg){width="312" height="174"}

</div>

This preparation exercise can only be done assisted. Lie on your back
having one knee bent. Have the assistant to pull your other leg up as
shown above for 15 times holding for 30 seconds and increasing the time
with 10 seconds for each repeat.

### Preparation for oversplits 2

![](/images/Image492.jpg){width="203" height="152"}

Sit in a split. Put your hands under the knee, interlock them and pull
the knee upwards to what is shown above. Stay there for a slow 1-2-3-4-5
count and then pull the knee upwards a bit more.

![](/images/Image493.jpg){width="206" height="101"}

Bend your back as far back as possible with the knee bent. Do 20 repeats
<span class="underline">never</span> going out of the split and if possible with the knee
bent at all times.

## Exercise 10

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image475.jpg){width="305" height="195"}
![](/images/Image251.jpg){width="258" height="197"}

</div>

For this exercise you will need to have a solid object about 20cm high
or higher (increase the height with as your muscles stretch)! Put one
foot up on the object and to a 1-2-3-4-5 gentle bounce try to sit on the
floor. Use the hands for support. Try to get the front leg as close as
possible to a vertical position while sitting with your whole rear leg
on the floor and your hip to the floor. Change feet around and repeat
the exercise. Continue until you have completed 15 exercises with each
leg to the front. 

![](/images/osplass201.jpg){width="251" height="163"}

Assisted 1: Use an object as described above and increase the height as
your muscles stretch. Put one foot up on the object and sit in a split
and use the hands for support. Have the assistant to by applying firm
pressure to your seat or the thighs (as shown above) push you down till
you sit on the floor and then hold you there for at least 1 minute.
Still holding you on the floor the assistant should bend your rear leg
as shown above to increase the stretch and hold for 30 seconds. Increase
the height of the object until the front leg is as close as possible to
a vertical position. Change feet around and repeat the exercise.
Continue until you have completed 15 repeats with each leg to the front
and continue to the next assisted stretch or exercise 11. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image476.jpg){width="306" height="212"}
![](/images/fs-os-ass-01.jpg){width="207" height="212"}

</div>

Assisted 2: The assistant should lift your front leg up from split as
shown above. It's possible to lift the leg until it is vertical. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fs-os-ass-02.jpg){width="254" height="220"}
![](/images/Image253.jpg){width="237" height="220"}

</div>

Assisted 3: The assistant should sit on your rear leg and lift your
front leg up from split as shown above. It's possible to lift the leg
until it is vertical. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image254.jpg){width="226" height="172"}
![](/images/ospl01.jpg){width="260" height="174"}
![](/images/ospl02.jpg){width="256" height="174"}

</div>

You will very soon find that it's possible to put an object under both
legs to get the maximum possible oversplit and that it will be
comfortable.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image477.jpg){width="193" height="276"}
![](/images/Image478.jpg){width="196" height="276"}
![](/images/Image479.jpg){width="191" height="276"}

</div>

If possible you can use different furniture to do this exercise. Let
your imagination flow.

## Exercise 11

Do this exercise <span class="underline">only</span> after being sucessfull with the
exercises above, splits exercise 10 and the backbend exercises necessary

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/DoraToth551.jpg){width="262" height="195"}
![](/images/DoraToth389.jpg){width="267" height="195"}

</div>

Sit in the splits with front toe up and rear toes down (not on the
side). Use a suitable object that you can rest the front foot on that is
high enough to require a stretch to sit on the floor. With a bounce
1-2-3-4-5 sit on the floor and use the hands for balance. Then bend the
knee of the rear leg to increase the stretch and hold the position for
30 seconds. When you feel comfortable change the object to a higher one
until you're able to sit on the floor with the front leg raised to a
vertical position as shown above.

Assisted: Have the assistant lift your leg up from split till the leg is
vertical as in the exercise above.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/fs-os-01.jpg){width="298" height="153"}
![](/images/fs-os-02.jpg){width="249" height="153"}

</div>

### Variation 

You can also do this exercise having your rear leg on an
object as shown above.

![](/images/Image256.jpg){width="222" height="148"}

When you sit on the floor bend back to try to get the head to the seat.
Use your hands to provide support and balance.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image480.jpg){width="245" height="186"}
![](/images/DoraToth339.jpg){width="247" height="186"}

</div>

Now bend the knee to increase the stretch for a 1-2-3-4-5 count and hold
the position for 1 minute. Try to get the front leg as close as possible
to a vertical position. Change legs so that the other foot is to the
front. Do this 15 times with each leg.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/natasha1.jpg){width="202" height="101"}
![](/images/natasha2.jpg){width="202" height="101"}
![](/images/natasha3.jpg){width="191" height="101"}
![](/images/natasha4.jpg){width="182" height="101"}
![](/images/natasha5.jpg){width="141" height="123"}

</div>

You will very soon feel that you need to put an object under both legs
to get the maximum possible oversplit. A good suggestion is to use two
chairs as shown above by Natasha.

![](/images/Ula4.jpg){width="154" height="207"}

This exercise can also be done standing as shown above.

### Assisted variations

At this level of flexibility assisted stretches are recommended to do.
You might find them slightly unpleasant to in the beginning, but that
disappeards quite soon and at that stage most people think that they are
pleasant and prefere to do assisted stretches. You will find that this
is a quickest and best way to achieve maximum oversplits. 

When doing assisted oversplit the assistant should stretch the leg
<span class="underline">slowly as far as possible,</span> hold the stretch at least 1
minute and then release the stretch a bit and stretch again. An example:
If the assistant stretches your legs into a 220 degrees oversplit he
should hold the position there, release the stretch to 200 degrees, then
again stretch to 230, hold, release to 210 degrees, stretch to 240
degrees, hold, release to 220 degrees and so on til the maximum
oversplit is reached. 

![](/images/Ula15.jpg){width="199" height="155"}

Have the assistant holding the front leg as far up as possible and pull
you backwards towards the rear leg and hold the position for 1 minute.
Lying down on the rear leg is possible. <span class="underline">Always stay in the splits or oversplits position!</span> Do at least 15 repeats with each leg.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Ula41.jpg){width="147" height="192"}
![](/images/asstos2.jpg){width="194" height="192"}
![](/images/asstos1.jpg){width="219" height="192"}

</div>

In a standing position lean on something and have the assistant to
firmly push your rear leg as far as possible into an oversplit as shown
above and hold it for 1 minute. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ula01.jpg){width="143" height="192"}
![](/images/Ula6.jpg){width="147" height="192"}

</div>

After that bend the knee of the rear leg and let the assistant should
firmly push your leg as far as possible into the oversplit and hold
there for another minute. Do at least 15 repeats with each leg. <span class="underline">Always stay in the splits or oversplits position between the repeats!</span>  

![](/images/Ula_f02.jpg){width="236" height="138"}

Lying on the side and holding the rear leg as close as possible to your
back have the assistant pull your front leg as far as possible into an
oversplit as shown above and hold the position for 1 minute. [Always
stay in the splits or oversplits position between the
repeats!]{.underline} Do at 15 repeats with each leg.

![](/images/Ultig05.jpg){width="145" height="190"}

Stand in a split, bend backwards and lean on your assistant. Have the
assistant pull your rear leg toward him as far as possible into an
oversplit and hold the position for 1 minute. Do at least 15 repeats
with each leg. <span class="underline">Always stay in the splits or oversplits position between the repeats!</span>  

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image467.jpg){width="254" height="203"}
![](/images/Ula_f14.jpg){width="171" height="203"}

</div>

Here is something to aim for, a 270 degrees oversplit, performed by Lisa
and Urszula. It will come quicker than you think...

![](/images/bbfs-os-01.jpg){width="233" height="220"}

...and <span class="underline">with</span> <span class="underline">assistance</span> <span class="underline">and after doing all splits and leg exercises</span> to Elzbieta's 305 degrees
oversplit. This is as far as it's possible to go and requires a partial
dislocation of the rear leg. 

## Exercise 12

![](/images/ss-os-03.jpg){width="302" height="166"}

Here too you will need to have a solid object about 20cm high or higher
(increase the height as your muscles stretch)! Put one foot up on the
object and to a 1-2-3-4-5 gentle bounce try to sit on the floor. Use the
hands for support. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ospl-01a.jpg){width="262" height="144"}
![](/images/ospl-01b.jpg){width="303" height="144"}

</div>

For mor support and to increase the stretch bend forward. While reaching
forward tension your muscles and move your feet so that the toes point
forward. Relax and move the feet so that the feet point up. Change feet
around and repeat the exercise. Continue until you have completed 15
exercises with each leg up on the object.

![](/images/Image468.jpg){width="298" height="149"}

Assisted: Have the assistant hold one hand on your back and lift the leg
up. It's possible to lift the leg at least 50 degrees and often until it
is vertical.

## Exercise 13

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-os-11.jpg){width="232" height="164"}
![](/images/delphine1.jpg){width="283" height="164"}
![](/images/delphine2.jpg){width="255" height="164"}

</div>

Use a couch or two soft chairs or two chairs with padding. You will need
something to steady you. The couch has this. If you use chairs you can
place a chair in front of your body to steady you if you need it. With
your toes pointing up bounce down to a 1-2-3-4-5 count. The goal is to
reach the floor and get an as deep oversplit as you can and at the same
time stay erect with a straight back. Repeat 15 times. When you can't
get a deeper oversplit change chairs, couch or put something under to
get the legs up higher.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image260.jpg){width="216" height="162"}
![](/images/ss-os-ass-03.jpg){width="270" height="162"}

</div>

Assisted: Have the assistant to lift the legs up as shown above.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/delphine3.jpg){width="278" height="158"}
![](/images/delphine4.jpg){height="158"}

</div>

When you sit comfortable on the floor in the oversplit place the hands
on the floor for support (as an alternative you can slide them to the
front for a better stretch) and lean forward bringing the head and body
down to a 1-2-3-4-5 action as near to the floor as you can. Do this 15
times.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-os-ass-05.jpg){width="291" height="122"}
![](/images/ss-os-12.jpg){width="268" height="122"}
![](/images/split-over-ass-100.jpg){width="127" height="195"}

</div>

Assisted: Have you feet on something. The assistant should firmly push
your hip downwards till it reaches the floor and then help you lean
forward towards the floor.

## Variation

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ss-os-10.jpg){width="244" height="189"}
![](/images/ss-os-14.jpg){width="218" height="189"}

</div>

Standing at a barre raise one leg to the side and lay it on the barre.
Hold yourself as close to the barre to get the legs into split position
and to a 1-2-3-4-5 count bounce towards a sitting position on the floor.
Do 15 repeats and change legs. 

## Exercise 14

### Variation 1

![](/images/Image247.jpg){width="268" height="201"}

In this exercise you're going to train overstraddles. Lie down on the
floor on the back with a firm cushion about 15cm thick (or anything else
you like that will let you do this exercise) under the seat. Have your
feet vertical. Split the legs by bringing them toes towards the floor.
To the 1-2-3-4-5 gentle bounce try to get the toes to the floor. Legs
back to vertical and repeat the exercise 15 times.

![](/images/ss-os-ass-02.jpg){width="261" height="192"}

Assisted 1: For preparation you can have the assistant keep your hip to
the floor and firmly lift your leg. When reached the maximum level of
flexibility at this time hold the position for 30 seconds, release and
repeat for 15 times increasing the time held in the positions with 10
seconds each time.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/ssosass201.jpg){width="384" height="115"}
![](/images/ss-os-ass-06.jpg){width="256" height="151"}

</div>

Assisted 2: Have the assistant to firmly push your legs towards the
floor as shown above. When reached the maximum level of flexibility at
this time hold the position for 30 seconds, release and repeat 15 times
increasing the time held in the positions with 10 seconds each time.

![](/images/ostr-ass-101.jpg){width="169" height="173"}

Assisted 3: Sit in a straddlespli and have the assistant put his legs
towards your seat and firmly pull your legs towards him as shown above.
When reached the maximum level of flexibility at this time hold the
position for 30 seconds, release and repeat 15 times increasing the time
held in the position with 10 seconds each time. <span class="underline">Always stay in the straddleplits or overstraddles position between the repeats!</span>  

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image248.jpg){width="223" height="104"}
![](/images/Image249.jpg){width="305" height="87"}

</div>

Here are some overstraddles after some of doing this exercise.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image466.jpg){width="201" height="236"}
![](/images/lavella44.jpg){width="151" height="237"}

</div>

...and this is the overstraddle you should strive for

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/lavella43.jpg){width="230" height="155"}
![](/images/lavella45.jpg){width="269" height="156"}

</div>

At this level if you're good enough at the backbends you can also
combine this position with a backbend as above. It will give you more
stability and increase the stretch.

### Variation 2 

![](/images/Image470.jpg){width="267" height="135"}

Preferably use two soft chairs or two chairs with padding to do this
exercise. Bounce to the 1-2-3-4-5 and try to oversplit to the floor. Use
hand support (or elbows) to take the weight for a 5 count rest as in the
picture to the right and then repeat the stretch. Again, if you are able
to sit you will need to add more height. Do this 15 times. Keep your
toes to the front throughout the exercise as shown in the right picture.

![](/images/Image488.jpg){width="264" height="186"}

Assisted 1: Put your legs on two chairs as above and have the assistant
to firmly push you down. When reached the maximum level of flexibility
at this time hold the position for 30 seconds, release and repeat for 15
times increasing the time held in the positions with 10 seconds each
time.

![](/images/Image266.jpg){width="216" height="162"}

Assisted 2: Have the assistant either to push you down or to lift the
legs up as shown above.

## Exercise 15

![](/images/Image267.jpg){width="346" height="103"}

In this exercise you will do a split with a backbend.

Sit in the splits with front toe up and rear toes down (not on the
side). Backbend to try to get the head to the seat.

![](/images/Image268.jpg){width="347" height="106"}

Raise the head a little and try to get the head to the floor outside the
knee. Use the hands wherever is comfortable to maintain balance. Do this
15 times.

Assisted: Have the assistant to pull you backwards towards the leg.

![](/images/Jaqueline1.jpg){width="193" height="288"}

When you are good at this position you can try the one above which
includes a split, twisted backbend and a partially twisted rear leg. It
will train your balance and flexibility and at the same time prepare you
for dislocating the legs since you'll be able to twist less the more
you do it and still be able to put the rear leg under the opposite
armpit. Start with standing in a split with your back bent and the rear
leg behind as show above by Jaqueline.

![](/images/Jaqueline2.jpg){width="194" height="288"}

Now grab your rear leg, move it over your head and under the chin and
twist your back still staying in the backbend.

![](/images/Jaqueline3.jpg){width="194" height="288"}

Twist even more until you're able to put the foot under your armpit and
put the arm in a position locking the foot under the armpit. Repeat 20
times with each leg and in the last repeat stay for as long as you can.

## Exercise 16

This is a more advanced oversplit exercise. Doing it you will be capable
of partially dislocating the hip socked and it will prepare you for
something many call crazy splits, but most important to more advanced
yoga asanas where a full dislocation is necessary. For this the hip
socket must almost come out of joint to get the movement required. 

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/gosia1.jpg){width="237" height="95"}
![](/images/gosia2.jpg){width="216" height="95"}
![](/images/gosia3.jpg){height="95"}

</div>

For this you will need to prepare already when doing the oversplit and
overstraddle exercises. This is easily done by changing between the
oversplits and overstraddles without going out of the
oversplit/overstraddle as shown above by Gosia. You should do this for
15 times after doing both types of splits. This will prepare you for
this exercise and make it easier. You will have to to force or strain
the hip joints in the process and feel a bit discomfort, but that is
necessary in the beginning and you shouldn't be worried. Anyone can
become able to hip dislocate and with dislocation they are then able to
do this exercise with ease. Doing the oversplit exercises over and over
again here will help you getting there and then your dislocating hips
will allow you to do this. During the exercise you must be completely
relaxed in the leg and let the leg rest while moving.
![](/images/Image269.jpg){width="251" height="159"}

You start by doing the front split with the heel up on a chair or
similar and lower into the front split sitting on the floor with the leg
raised and the rear leg flat behind you. In this position the hip is on
its way out. This can feel a bit odd the first times, but stay relaxed
and don't try to move the leg.
![](/images/Image270.jpg){width="250" height="198"}

Then, keeping the raised foot vertical, and still sitting firmly on the
floor, very slowly turn the body through 90 degrees so that the leg up
is now to the side. The hip socket will move out a bit more to not quite
complete dislocation and you might hear popping and clicking sounds, but
this is normal. The new position will be a very oversplit to the side.
Repeat at least 20 times with each leg and if possible 2 or 3 times each
day (a recommendation is in the morning, at lunch time and in the
evening). If you feel you can do a deeper oversplit change chairs, couch
or put something under to get the legs up higher.

Remember that the big thing is to stay relaxed.  If a full dislocation
occurrs do not tense up -- you will still feel comfortable. Just
continue the stretch as far as possible. When you turn your body back
the joint will automatically return to it's natural state. Preferably
try to be assisted and if you like to experiment as much as you
like.... Also you will most likely hear little clicks and pops from
your joint, but that is no cause for concern. It's normal.

Assisted: Assisted stretches are highly recommended until your joint
comes out of it's socket with ease. They are also necessary, because
they also prevent you from stopping at an early point (even if you
wouldn't use assisted stretches never stop at an early point). If
you're hypermobile continue with the assisted stretches beyond a full
dislocation. Have the assistant to hold the leg while you turn the body.
Then have the assistant raise the leg up as far as possible, hold and
down again and rotate the leg 90 degrees to each side back and forth
(it's possible to rotate the leg 180 degrees!) until the stretch and
dislocation feels comfortable. This might take time, but will loosen
your joint even more and give a good stretch. To make the stretch even
better the assistant can also slowly pull your leg backwards and upwards
30-50 degrees while rotating the leg as mentioned above. This time the
rotation can easily be beyond 180 degrees each direction and eases the
dislocation. Another way to increase the stretch in the dislocation is
to start in the oversplit to the front, raise the front leg to a
vertical position and then move it to the side (left leg to the left
side, right leg to the right side) and then back again as many times as
necessary. If you train together with a partner of a different gender,
and you wish to be at the same level at all times the male partner
should always be assisted. Then hold the stretches longer and to the
same level as you if you're the female partner. Do this secquence of
assisted stretches as many times as necessary to get the hips dislocated
with ease and if possible 2 or 3 times each day (a recommendation is a
sequence in the morning, at lunch time and in the evening).

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/Image471.jpg){width="183" height="150"}
![](/images/Image472.jpg){width="208" height="150"}
![](/images/Image473.jpg){width="161" height="149"}
![](/images/disll1.JPG){width="112" height="148"}

</div>

Doing the dislocated oversplit exercise daily will help you to do poses
like the above (try them the better you get) and many other advanced
yoga asanas that require dislocations easily and quickly.

<div class="img-group">

![](/images/pierre1.jpg){width="192" height="169"}
![](/images/pierre2.jpg){width="176" height="169"}
![](/images/pierre3.jpg){width="171" height="169"}

</div>

When you get good enough and can master the dislocations with ease feel
free to experiment as much as you like. This is Pierre doing full
controlled dislocations. It took him 6 months from beginning doing the
dislocated oversplit exercises to achieve this level of flexibility.

<span class="important">Important notice!</span> If you have suffered from one or many dislocations in
either hips or shoulders you should learn to do controlled dislocations.
This often is a symptom of hypermobility and you will sooner or later
dislocate again. A medical term for this is Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, but
often this disease is missed by most MD's unless it's mentioned. Around
40% of the population has Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome and often without
knowing it. The symptoms are often pain in joints, hypermobility and
dislocations of the joints (for example if you can learn how to do a
split in a short time, partially dislocate your shoulders - that often
means that you will hear a popping or cracking sound - or if you have
overbent elbows you most likely have Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome). Very often
the symptoms show gradually, often with pain or dislocations, and
increase with time to states that aren't controllable. It's not a
question if it happens, but when. To prevent this it's important to
learn to do controlled dislocations, build up strenght and flexibility
around all joints and practicing yoga and contortion does all this. The
reason is simple. If a symptom like a dislocation occurs and it isn't
controlled your muscles will go into spasm. Being able to do a
controlled dislocation prevents this and it should be done many times on
a daily basis. A controlled dislocation is a dislocation where you are
able to dislocate the joint, move the limb <span class="underline">with the help of another limb or with help from someone that assists you</span> and then
putting it back to it's normal state. All joints that can be dislocated
must be trained in this order of fashion and the controlled dislocation
must become a part of your normal range of movement! It's important to
train all joints that dislocate, because that you once had an
uncontrolled dislocation in i.e. the hips doesn't mean that the next
won't be in the shoulders etc and the dislocations gradually worsens
for each time making it impossible to control them in the end. You
should work the same way with backbends and later  backfolds since the
dislocations tend to spread to other areas than the joints around the
limbs. When working on backbends and especially backfolds put a stick, a
finger or something appropriate to increase the fold and partially
dislocate the vertebrae. The last part is <span class="underline">very</span> important!
Using [the contortion barre](./contortion_barre) is recommended.
Persons that have experienced or experiences symptoms like dislocating,
pain in joint and hypermobility should work towards being able to do all
of the program to perfection, as a prevention, to be able to get the
joints and the muscles around the joints supple to the outer limit and
learn to control them in situations like this by doing controlled
dislocations as much as possible. Also all exercises, if possible,
should be done assisted with firm stretches until the maximum suppleness
is reached at least once each day, preferrably more! This might be
difficult, uncomforable and even painful, but only in the beginning.
It's not as difficult as it sounds and that is something you've probably
found out by now or will.


