# Ballet positions

There are 5 basic ballet positions that will improve your posture and
your hip and leg flexibility and in the longer run help you towards
being able to easily carry out the exercises en point√©. If you're to do
them do all 5 of them one by one in a slow sequence and at least 25
repeats or preferably 50 repeats. It's important that they are done
exactly as show below!

## First position

![](/images/Pos1.jpg){width="275" height="182"}

Turn your toes out to the side with your heels touching. You must turn
your whole leg out at the hip, not just your foot. At first you may not
be able to turn out very far. You will improve after some hard work and
be able to do all the turnouts below beyond a turnout position.

## Second position

::: danger

Image lost \{ url="/images/Pos2.jpg" width="377" height="193" \}

:::

Turn your toes out on the same line as first position, but stand with
your feet apart. The space between your heels should be about the lenght
of one of your feet. Place the whole of both feet on the floor. Don't
roll forwards and put too much weight on your big toes.

## Third position

![](/images/Pos3.jpg){width="214" height="194"}

Cross one foot halfway in front of the other. Don't forget it is not
just your feet that must work. Keep your legs turned out and your body
lifted. Your weight should be balanced evenly on both legs.

## Fourth position

![](/images/Pos4.jpg){width="144" height="193"}

This is the most difficult position, because it's hard to maintain your
turnout. Place one foot exactly in front of the other with a space
between them.

## Fifth position

![](/images/Pos5.jpg){width="147" height="180"}

Your feet should be turned out, fully crossed, and touching each other
firmly.

## Changing between positions

![](/images/releve.gif){width="110" height="230"}

A good example showing how to change between the positions is the one
shown above. As you can see it should preferably be done with a pointe
between each position when possible.

## The turnout

Of most importance is "learning" the concept of "turnout." I have
learned that it is a thing of your mind, telling your muscles literally
what to do. It is a process of imagining your thigh and hip muscles
'turning out'. You will place your hands on the front of your hips and
thighs and push gently around to the outside thighs, and then to the
back, meanwhile concentrating and telling your muscles to follow. It
takes a lot of time, and concentration, but I have found that it has
worked for me. I can feel those very muscles strengthening. I am hoping
before long that it will become an unconscious process, in which you
won't have to think about it, and it will just happen.

